Who are you and what do you do?
I'm Stephen Thompson, I work part time as a Research Software Engineer at the Wellcome/EPSRC Centre for Interventional and Surgical Sciences(WEISS). At WEISS I am developing software to deliver augmented reality for surgery, primarily written in Python, JavaScript and C++.
I aim to enable researchers to better utilise open source software to create open and reproducible science. Outside of my working hours I am an advocate for getting children coding, running a CodeClub and creating content to encourage involvement with computer science. 

What is your project?
I have used a Raspberry PI to create a virtual birthday cake. The virtual cake consists of a looping video of a cake created on MineCraft with 9 candles that can be turned on and off using voltages generated by turning miniature wind turbines on a matching physical model cake. The physical cake was constructed from spare pieces of wood and painted to match the virtual cake. Once all the candles are blown out the birthday child can lift the model cake to reveal an edible cake which is mercifully free of saliva.

Where did the idea come from?
I have always enjoyed making my children's birthday cakes, with a firm belief that form and function are as important as flavour. In 2021 I was faced with the problem of not being able to blow out candles on the cake itself due to COVID 19. A virtual cake controlled by miniature wind turbines seemed the obvious solution. I'd recently started developing web applications for research and education in surgery, so it made sense to reuse these skills for the virtual cake.

Why use Raspberry Pi?
The Raspberry PI provided a cost effective interface with the analogue to digital converters needed to read the wind turbine voltages, along with sufficient computing power to serve the web application from within the cake itself. Using the Raspberry PI enabled me use the same software architecture (Python, Flask, HTML) as I have used professionally. 

Roughly how does it work?
The application uses Flask (https://flask.palletsprojects.com/en/2.0.x/) to serve a webpage which any device on the local network can access. The webpage consists of a looping video of the MineCraft birthday cake overlaid with 9 GIF animations of candles. A JavaScript loop is used to repeatedly send a POST request to the webserver asking for the voltage from one of nine analogue to digital converters (the ADC board can support up to 16 candles). The code to interface with the ADC's and reply to the POST requests is written in Python and utilises the Flask and gpiozero libraries. All the code is available on GitHub (https://github.com/thompson318/BirthdayCandles)

Once the application is started you can place the model cake in front of the children along with a screen showing the virtual cake. I used a separate monitor attached to a laptop to view the cake, however anything with a webrowser and screen should work, you could connect the RaspberryPI to a monitor and use that.

What were the reactions to it like?
I was slightly nervous that the children would find it too abstract, but they worked it out pretty quickly. They saw the connection between the plastic wind turbines on the cake and the candles on the screen, and worked out that you could turn the onscreen candles off by blowing on the wind turbines. There was much laughter and smiles. The children were also very pleased to discover that there was actual cake underneath it all.  

What are the major components?
A Raspberry PI
Some sort of Analogue to digital converter, I used this one from BC-Robitics (https://www.bc-robotics.com/tutorials/getting-started-raspberry-pi-16-channel-adc-hat-v2/)
Wind turbines, I used these ones from Sntieecr (https://www.amazon.co.uk/Sntieecr-Mini-Generator-Motors-3V-12V-DC-Motor-Generator-Educational-Experiment/dp/B0922N8MCR/)
A variety of jumper wires and a bread board to connect everything together.
A soldering iron.

Anything else you'd like to add?
All code and build instructions can be found at https://github.com/thompson318/BirthdayCandles
